Text taken from http://cloud1.arc.nasa.gov/aaoe/project/statement.html
6/12/05
--------------------------------------------

Antarctic Ozone

INITIAL FINDINGS FROM PUNTA ARENAS CHILE

This statement has been prepared by the scientists who went to Punta 
Arenas, Chile to study the Antarctic ozone hole. This summary 
represents the views of the scientists themselves and not necessarily 
those of the cosponsoring organizations. The findings that will be 
presented are preliminary. Under normal circumstances, scientists 
studying such a complex scientific issue would take many months to 
years to disclose their initial findings. However, the issue of ozone 
perturbation is one of justifiable public concern, and hence the public 
should be kept abreast of the current scientific thinking. It is in 
this spirit that we would like to share our provisional picture of the 
Antarctic springtime ozone hole. Furthermore, this will help to 
stimulate the scientific inquiry and debate that can only lead to an 
improved and timely understanding of the phenomenon. A much more 
complete and final interpretation of our findings will be forthcoming 
after a planned intensive series of scientific meetings and the 
submittal of a group of scientific papers to the peer review process. 
This procedure will occur within the next six months. 

Description of Goals and Objectives of the Mission 

Three basic theories have been proposed to explain the observed decrease in spring-time 
Antarctic ozone that has been occurring since the late-1970's. One class of theories 
suggest that the hole is caused by the human activity of loading the atmosphere with 
chlorinated and brominated chemicals. Chlorofluorocarbons (CFC's) and Halons are 
contributing increasing levels of chlorine and bromine to the atmosphere. These 
compounds could then efficiently destroy stratospheric ozone in the Antarctic 
environment because of the special geophysical conditions that exist in this region of the 
atmosphere, i.e. a contained polar vortex (an isolated air mass), cold temperatures, and 
the presence of polar stratospheric clouds. A second class of theories suggests that there 
have been changes in the circulation of the atmosphere, which now transports ozone-poor 
air into Antarctica. A third theory postulates solar and cosmic ray induced, periodically 
enhanced abundances of oxides of nitrogen, which can cyclically destroy ozone.

The NSF-coordinated expedition to the McMurdo station in Antarctica 
last year was exceptionally successful in increasing our understanding 
of the Antarctic ozone hole. In conjunction with other experiments, 
this ground based effort demonstrated the recurrence of the ozone hole, 
the altitude over which ozone was depleted, that chlorine and nitrogen 
chemistry was highly perturbed relative to that observed at mid-
latitudes, and that the solar cycle theory is an unlikely explanation. 
However, the McMurdo data were insufficient to distinguish adequately 
between the relative contributions of the first two classes of 
theories. Therefore, the goal of the present airborne campaign is to 
improve our understanding of the relative contributions of these, and 
possibly other, mechanisms to the formation of the Antarctic ozone 
hole.

One of the key environmental issues is whether the ozone depletion 
observed in Antarctica will always be localized in and around 
Antarctica, or whether it is a precursor of future global changes. A 
longer term objective of this campaign is to be able to provide 
information relevant to answering this question.

Participants, Sponsors, and Foreign Government Support 

The campaign was coordinated by the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA) and cosponsored by NASA, the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the National Science Foundation 
(NSF), and the Chemical Manufacturers Association (CMA). In addition, 
the British Meteorological Office (BMO) provided a significant 
contribution to the project.

Scientists, engineers, and other personnel from Harvard University, 
University of Denver, University of Washington, University of Colorado, 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 
NASA Ames Research Center, NASA Langley Research Center, NASA Goddard 
Space Flight Center, NOAA Aeronomy Laboratory, the British 
Meteorological Office, the European Center for Medium Range Weather 
Forecasts (ECMWF), Centre Nationale Recherches Meteorologiques, and 
Atmospheric and Environmental Research, Inc. participated in this 
campaign. Dr. J. C Farman of the British Antarctic Survey kindly made 
available Halley Bay ozonesonde data. Scientists from both Chile and 
Argentina were also involved.

Key participants in this campaign were also the flight and ground crews 
of NASA, Lockheed, and Northrop, who flew and maintained the ER-2 and 
DC-8 research aircraft under very challenging conditions. Research and 
Data Systems provided the necessary telecommunication links and 
support.

The Chilean government hosted the airborne campaign, which was based 
out of Punta Arenas. The Chilean Air Force supplied the facilities and 
logistical support. The Chilean Antarctic Institute provided advice 
regarding the study area. In addition. invaluable assistance was 
provided by the Direccion General De Aeronautica Civil, and the 
National Meteorologic Service of Chile.

Other countries also helped: Panama, Costa Rica, Peru, and Ecuador 
cooperated with the overflights necessary for the transit from the 
United States to Chile. The government of Argentina offered alternate 
landing fields for the aircraft as they returned from their Antarctic 
missions. The National Meteorological Service of Argentina furnished 
data from Marambio. Lastly, the government of New Zealand assisted with 
the transcontinental Antarctic flight by the DC-8 that was part of the 
return to the United States.

Description of Campaign 

The Airborne Antarctic Ozone Campaign succeeded in making 12 flights of 
the high altitude ER-2 aircraft, and 13 flights of the DC-8 medium 
altitude aircraft over Antarctica. The ER-2 typically operated at 
geometric altitudes relative to sea level between 12.0 and 18.7 km and 
flew to 72 degrees South along the Palmer Peninsula. The DC-8 operated 
at pressure altitudes up to 11.1 km and with its long range capability 
was able to reach the South Pole on several occasions, and is currently 
returning to the United States via New Zealand after crossing the 
Antarctic continent. The project had available to it Total Ozone 
Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) images of the total ozone column of the 
southern hemisphere within a day of observation and of the orbits 
passing over the region of the Antarctic peninsula within 2 to 4 hours 
of observation. Aerosol and cloud extinction data were also available 
from the Stratospheric Aerosol Measurement (SAM II) and Stratospheric 
Aerosol and Gas Experiment (SAGE II), with the latter providing ozone 
measurements as well. Twice daily analyses and forecasts of winds and 
temperatures up to 30 mb, 22 km, for three days ahead, were provided by 
the BMO in chart form, plus forecasts of the trajectories of air 
parcels on surfaces along which air masses move. Photochemical 
modelling along these trajectories was done using the aircraft 
observations. The ECMWF provided once a day analyses and forecasts up 
to 30 mb for 10 days ahead. A small theory team assisted the 
experimental scientists with the interpretation on a day to day basis. 
This approach was possible because of the availability of rapid data 
reduction facilities and an extensive, dedicated international 
telecommunications network.

Detailed lists of the participants, a discussion of the theories being 
addressed, the approach taken in the tests of these theories, and a 
description of the apparatus involved are given in the Airborne 
Antarctic Ozone Experiment Plan (NASA and NOAA, July 1987). Copies are 
available on request from NASA Ames Research Center or NASA 
Headquarters.

Data Obtained from the ER-2 and DC-8 Instrumentation 

The spatial and temporal distribution of a large number of relatively 
short-lived chemical constituents that participate in chemical 
reactions that affect the abundance of ozone were measured from both 
the ER-2 and DC-8. Instruments aboard the ER-2 resulted in measurements 
of the distributions of ozone (03), chlorine monoxide radical (ClO), 
bromine monoxide radical (BrO), total odd nitrogen (NOy), nitric oxide 
(NO), and water (H2O) in the vicinity of the aircraft at altitudes 
ranging from 12 to 18 km above the Earth's surface, well into the 
altitude region where ozone is undergoing depletion. Instruments aboard 
the DC-8 measured the abundances of H2O and O3 in the vicinity of the 
aircraft, the vertical distribution of O3 for approximately 10 km above 
the aircraft, and the total column amounts of O3, hydrochloric acid 
(HCl), chlorine nitrate (ClONO2), chlorine dioxide (OClO), BrO, 
hydrofluoric acid (HF), NO, nitrogen dioxide (NO2), nitric acid (HNO3), 
as well as a number of other constituents, above the aircraft altitude.

Additionally, the temporal and spatial distributions of long-lived 
chemical tracers and dynamical variables were measured in order to 
understand atmospheric motions. These included measurements of nitrous 
oxide (N2O), methane (CH4), chlorofluorocarbons 11 (CFC13) and 12 
(CF2Cl2), carbon tetrachloride (CCl4), and methyl chloroform (CH3CCl3). 
In-situ measurements of all of these species were made from both the 
ER-2 and DC-8, and column measurements of most from the DC-8. The size 
distribution, abundance, and composition of particles was determined by 
instrumentation aboard the ER-2, as well as the vertical distribution 
of aerosols from 12 to 28 km by the DC-8 lidar, in an effort to 
understand the role of heterogeneous processes. Additionally, 
atmospheric pressure, temperature, lapse rate, and winds were measured 
aboard the ER-2 to determine the state variables and dynamical 
structure of the atmosphere.

The project had regular ozone sonde data available from the Palmer 
station, the Halley Bay station, the South Pole station, and McMurdo. 
These define the vertical distribution of ozone at points not routinely 
covered by the flight tracks. Ozonesondes were launched at special 
times from Palmer and the South Pole to coincide with aircraft 
overflights of those locations.

The analyses of some of these data sets have not yet been completed, 
either because of the lengthy data reduction procedures required or 
because of the sheer volume of raw data acquired. An example of the 
latter is the meteorological data set, whose initial analyses had the 
primary goal of forecasting the flight conditions. Furthermore, many of 
the analyses of the chemical data sets are clearly only preliminary, to 
be refined by recalibration checks and more sophisticated re-analyses 
available at the home laboratories. As a consequence, the initial 
picture summarized below cannot be a balanced, complete, and final one.

Results and their Relationship to Theories 

The processes controlling the abundance and distribution of ozone in 
Antarctica are complex and intertwined. However, given the successful 
nature of this campaign, we are now in a position to start to more 
fully appreciate the exquisite balance between the meteorological 
motions and the photochemistry. We will present our preliminary 
scientific findings as answers to a series of posed scientific 
questions that are relevant to public policy.

1) Did the springtime ozone hole occur over Antarctica in 1987?

Yes. TOMS satellite, balloon ozonesonde, and both ER-2 and DC-8 
aircraft measurements of ozone showed that the springtime ozone 
decrease occurred again this year. TOMS showed the spatial extent of 
the phenomenon is continental or greater in scale and revealed the 
temporal change in the total column of ozone. The abundance of ozone in 
August and September of 1987 was lower than any previous year at all 
latitudes south of 60 degrees. In mid-September of this year column 
ozone was approximately 15% lower at both 70 and 80 degrees south than 
the values observed in the lowest previous year of 1985. The balloon-
sonde data demonstrated that ozone was depleted in the altitude region 
between approximately 13 and 24 km at Halley Bay, and 15 and 24 km at 
Palmer. Ozone trends observed at Halley Bay and at Palmer are quite 
similar, with an approximate 50% decrease observed from mid-August to 
mid-September near 18 km. The upward looking lidar aboard the DC-8 
observed more than a 50% decrease in O3 at 77 to 90 degrees south 
between 14 and 19 km, during September, but no discernible trend 
between 12 and 14 km. There was also evidence from the lidar data of a 
decrease in O3 up to 23 km. The in-situ ER-2 instruments observed 
changes consistent with this picture.

The TOMS data showed that ozone did not simply change monotonically 
with time, but in some instances changed dramatically over large 
spatial scales in the matter of only a day or so. One example of such a 
rapid change in ozone is demonstrated by the TOMS data for September 4-
6 over the Palmer Peninsula and Weddell Sea. Changes of greater than 25 
Dobson units (DU) in one day were observed over large regions (3 
million square km).

2) Does the evidence indicate that both chemical and meteorological 
processes are responsible for the ozone hole?

The weight of observational evidence strongly suggests that both 
chemical and meteorological mechanisms perturbed the ozone. 
Additionally, it is clear that meteorology sets up the special 
conditions required for the perturbed chemistry.

3) Was the chemical composition of the Antarctic stratosphere observed 
to be perturbed?

Yes. It is quite evident that the chemical composition of the Antarctic 
stratosphere is highly perturbed compared to predictions based on 
currently accepted chemical and dynamical theories. The present 
findings are consistent with the observations made last year from 
McMurdo. The distribution of chlorine species is significantly 
different from that observed at mid-latitudes, as is the abundance and 
distribution of nitrogen species. The amount of total water within some 
regions of the vortex is significantly lower than anticipated.

Since late August the abundance of the chlorine monoxide radical within 
the polar chemically perturbed region has been elevated by a factor of 
more than 100 relative to that measured at mid-latitudes at the highest 
altitude at which the ER-2 was flown, about 18.5 km. However, the 
abundance of ClO was observed to decrease rapidly towards lower 
altitudes. At the highest flight levels, the abundance of ClO at local 
solar noon ranged between 0.5 and l ppbv for the last month of the 
campaign. While we have no data at higher altitudes, the observed 
increase in the abundance of ClO from lower altitudes, coupled with the 
observed low column abundances of HCl, suggests that the ClO abundance 
may increase somewhat at altitudes above 18 km. In addition to the 
steep decrease in ClO abundance at lower altitude, the abundance of ClO 
was also observed to decrease dramatically outside of the chemically 
perturbed region.

Chlorine dioxide, OClO, which is most likely formed in a reaction 
sequence involving the ClO radical, was observed both day and night at 
highly elevated concentrations compared to those at mid-latitude. The 
preliminary analyses of these observations are consistent with 
measurements made from McMurdo last year. The column content of 
hydrochloric acid, HCl, which is one of the major chlorine reservoirs 
at mid-latitudes, is very low within the chemically perturbed region 
reaching column contents below 1 x 10 (15) molecules per cm2. In 
addition, the column amount ratio of HCl/HF within the chemically 
perturbed region decreased significantly from a normal mid-latitude 
value of 4 to a value less than unity. While chlorine nitrate was 
observed, the data have yet to be fully analyzed thus precluding a 
statement at this time about its abundance.

The bromine monoxide radical has been observed at concentrations of a 
few pptv within the chemically perturbed region of the vortex at the 
flight levels of the ER-2. The abundance of BrO decreases at lower 
altitudes. However, because the observed concentrations are close to 
the detection limit of the instrument, little more can be said about 
the altitude dependence. The low measured abundances of BrO, coupled 
with our current lack of understanding of the ClO + BrO reaction means 
that we cannot currently assess the significance of this mechanism for 
ozone reductions at the ER-2 flight levels.

The ER-2 observations of the abundance of odd nitrogen, which is the 
sum of all nitrogen-containing reservoir and radical species, show, 
like total water, very low values within the chemically perturbed 
region of the vortex, indicating that the atmosphere has been 
denitrified, as well as dehydrated. Abundances of NOy of 8 - 12 ppbv 
were observed outside the chemically perturbed region, while abundances 
of 0.5 to 4 ppbv were observed inside the chemically perturbed region. 
A similar large change was observed for one of the nitrogen components, 
i.e. nitric oxide, NO. In addition, some of the NOy observations 
suggest that NOy component species are incorporated into polar 
stratospheric cloud (PSC) particles and nitrate was observed in the 
particle phase on some of the filter samples and on some of the wire 
impactor samples taken in the chemically perturbed region of the 
vortex. The column measurements of nitric oxide, nitrogen dioxide, and 
nitric acid, made from the DC-8 exhibit a strong decrease in the 
abundance of these species towards the center of the vortex. These low 
values of nitrogen species are contrary to all theories requiring 
elevated levels of nitrogen oxides, such as the proposed solar cycle 
theory.

4) How do the observed elevated ClO abundances support a chemical role 
in the formation of the ozone hole?

There is no longer debate as to whether ClO exists within the 
chemically perturbed region near 18 km at abundances sufficient to 
destroy ozone if our current understanding of the chlorine-ozone 
catalytic cycle is correct. The rate of decrease in ozone during the 
month of September at the highest altitudes at which the ER-2 was 
operated during this campaign is consistent with simultaneously 
observed concentrations of ClO. However, our present understanding of 
key chemical reaction rates and photodissociation products within the 
catalytic process is incomplete. Thus, laboratory studies are urgently 
needed. It is essential to define the rate of ClO dimer (Cl2O2) 
formation and the photolysis products of dimer decomposition because 
only one of several possible routes leads to ozone destruction. Once 
the results of ongoing laboratory studies become available, these in-
situ ClO data will allow the chemical mechanism to be quantitatively 
defined and its consequences better understood.

There is another line of observational evidence consistent with ozone 
destruction by chlorine catalysis: in the month of August, a consistent 
positive correlation between ClO and O3 was observed. By the middle of 
September, as the ozone concentration was dropping at ER-2 altitudes, a 
strong anti-correlation developed between ClO and O3. The anti-
correlation was usually present on both large and small scales within 
the chemically perturbed region.

There are observations that are not entirely consistent with these 
chemical arguments. For example, based on preliminary data from this 
year and data from last year from McMurdo, the observed diurnal 
behavior of OClO, is difficult to rationalize with the present chemical 
mechanisms, particularly in light of the new observations that the 
abundances of BrO are low at ER-2 flight altitudes.

5) Can the elevated abundances of ClO inside the chemically perturbed 
region of the chemically perturbed region be explained?

Significant progress was made. Observational data that air within the 
chemically perturbed region of the vortex is dehydrated and that the 
NOy abundances are very low are consistent with theories that have been 
invoked whereby the chlorine reservoir species, ClONO2 and HCl, can 
react on the surfaces of polar stratospheric clouds to enhance the 
abundance of active chlorine species, i.e. ClO. The observations also 
support the picture that the abundance of NOy is low because odd 
nitrogen can be removed from the atmosphere by being tied up in ice 
crystals, which can then gravitationally settle to much lower 
altitudes. Low abundances of NOy are needed to prevent the rapid 
reconversion of ClO to ClONO2. This picture is further supported by the 
observations of low column abundances of HCl, by occasional 
observations of high levels of nitrate found in the ice particles, and 
by the visual and lidar observations of high cirrus and polar 
stratospheric clouds.

One observation which is currently difficult to understand is the sharp 
decrease in the abundance of ClO at lower altitudes. This could be due 
to a lack of understanding of either the abundance or partitioning of 
ClOy, or to dynamical effects. Lack of observations of reactive 
hydrogen containing radicals, hydroxyl (OH) and hydroperoxy (HO2) 
currently prevents an assessment of their role in the conversion of 
chlorine reservoir species to ClO.

6) How do the observations support a meteorological role in the 
formation of the ozone hole?

There were instances of rapid large scale changes in total ozone where 
meteorology appears to have been the controlling factor. One such event 
occurred over the Palmer Peninsula on September 5. Over a period of 24 
hours total ozone as observed by TOMS decreased by 25 DU to below 200 
DU over an area of about 3 million square km. Such a rapid decrease is 
difficult to explain chemically. The origin of that air is not known. 
It could be either air naturally low in ozone, tropospheric/lower 
stratospheric, or air in which ozone had been chemically depleted. The 
feature moved over the Weddell Sea and persisted until September 16, 
when it merged with two other regions of low total ozone. Lidar 
measurements from the DC-8 showed low ozone values and extensive 
aerosol layers between 14 and 19 km in the region of the TOMS minimum 
of ozone. This and other similar events evident in the TOMS ozone data 
and the SAM II PSC data between September 5 and 14 were spatially 
correlated with deepening surface pressure lows with marked meridional 
flow from middle to high latitudes at lower stratospheric levels. The 
detailed meteorological mechanism by which the surface lows produce the 
low column ozone remains unclear and further analysis is required.

The data offer no support for sustained large scale upwelling. In the 
restricted region covered by the ER-2, 54 to 72 degrees south latitude 
and from altitudes of l2.5 to 18.5 km, measurements of CFC-11 and N2O 
which act as tracers of air motions show no evidence of a general 
increase in abundances above about 14 km during the mission, although 
there were instances of structure and elevated values.

The meteorology must play a role in the dehydration and denitrification 
processes. It is crucial to understand whether the necessary low 
temperatures are maintained radiatively or by ascent, or some 
combination of both.

7) Does the complexity of the situation suggest that we need to 
understand the interplay between meteorology and chemistry?

Yes. It is clear from our ER-2 flights that the region of dehydrated 
and denitrified air maintained a sharply defined latitude gradient 
throughout most of the campaign. On a purely meteorological definition, 
the vortex edge would be well outside the dehydrated, denitrified 
region. The meteorological flow must therefore have been such as to 
maintain a kind of "containment vessel", in which the perturbed 
chemistry could proceed without being influenced by mixing in more 
normal stratospheric air from outside or below.

Very low values of CFC- 11, CFC- 12, CH3CCl3, and N2O were observed at 
the upper levels of the ER-2 flight track within the "containment 
vessel". A key question is how these low values are produced and 
maintained in the chemically perturbed region.

The concept of mixing at the region of sharp latitudinal gradient is 
important, since it has the potential to supply nitrogen oxides which 
would tend to decelerate the chlorine chemistry. The meteorology is 
thus important in the termination phase as well as in the initiation 
phase.

8) Can you quantitatively separate the contributions of chemistry and 
meteorology to the formation of the ozone hole?

No. The September 5 event illustrates the complexity of the ozone hole, 
and the difficulty of deriving unambiguous dynamical or chemical 
signatures. The magnitude and rapidity of the decrease are difficult to 
ascribe to a chemical cause. Air of low ozone content appears to have 
been transported into the region. The origin of that air is not known. 
It could be either air naturally low in ozone, tropospheric/lower 
stratospheric, or air in which ozone had been chemically depleted.

Another illustration of the difficulty of clearly establishing chemical 
or dynamical mechanisms is the decreasing trends in ozone in regions of 
low ClO outside of the vortex whose magnitudes are comparable to those 
within the vortex. This is evident from an examination of the 
ozonesonde data from the Palmer station at 64 degrees south and 
comparing it to the Halley Bay data at 78 degrees south, and the DC-8 
lidar data. In addition, downward trends of ozone were observed in the 
lower altitude region where ClO concentrations were substantially lower 
than at 18 km.

9) What are the global implications?

Until we understand the cause or causes of the spring-time Antarctic 
hole, we will not be able to address this key question in a responsible 
manner. Thus, at this time, it is premature for us to speculate on this 
important topic. However, as we continue to analyze the data that we 
have acquired and further test and expand the pictures that we have 
developed, we will be in a better position to address this important 
question.

10) When will the data be in a form suitable for use in formulating 
national and international regulatory policies?

As noted in the opening paragraph, the schedule for the assimilation 
and publication of the results is brisk. Peer reviewed publications 
will appear in 1988. The results from the 1987 ground-based McMurdo 
campaign will likely appear on about the same schedule. Both sets of 
these completed conclusions would be the best basis for any possible 
policy re-evaluations. The major international scientific review 
scheduled for 1989, which will serve as input to the 1990 policy review 
of the Montreal Protocol, will have these conclusions available.

 

