Text taken from http://cloud1.arc.nasa.gov/aaoe/project/overview.html 
6/12/05
--------------------------------------------


ER-2 & DC-8 Aircraft Mission To Investigate Antarctic Ozone In Late Winter 1987
 
                                             Introduction

                                            Observations

Recent observations have shown since 1979 a dramatic and unexpected downward trend 
in the overhead column abundance of ozone during late winter and early spring over 
Antarctica, at the Halley Bay and Argentine Islands stations (76 degrees S, 27 degrees W 
and 65 degrees S, 64 degrees W). The reduction, amounting by 1985 to about 40% of the 
historical October monthly mean, has been confirmed and given a geographically mapped 
perspective by observations from NASA's Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) 
on Nimbus 7. Ozonesonde ascents from Syowa station (69 degrees S, 40 degrees E) in 
1982 and 1983 have shown that in October, before the final warming, ozone is depleted 
by between 10% and 50% at altitudes between about 10 and 22 km, compared to values 
observed in the late 1960's and early 1970's. The chemical data base has been 
considerably enhanced by the observations taken from late August to the beginning of 
November 1986 from McMurdo Base (78 degreees S, 167 degrees E) by the National 
Ozone Expedition (NOZE), which was organized by NSF. Ozone profiles, 33 in number 
distributed fairly evenly between 25 August and 6 November, confirmed the picture 
suggested by the Syowa data, and showed considerable vertical structure in the mixing 
ratio, particularly during October. It was clear that the ozone loss over McMurdo 
developed during September. Further, as yet unpublished, observations of the column 
abundances of O3, NO2, and OC1O by the NOAA Aeronomy Lab, of HCl, ClONO2 and 
HNO3 (inter alia) by JPL and observations of N2O and C1O by SUNY which contain 
some coarse information about altitude distribution, should all have a substantial impact 
on knowledge of the photochemical balance, and its interpretation. The NOAA data 
Show evidence of very unusual odd nitrogen chemistry (very low abundance and very 
small diurnal variation of NO2 and of unusual chlorine chemistry (high abundance of 
OC1O). 

In any instance where spatial or temporal change of a stratospheric chemical species is 
observed, the first question to be asked is whether it can be attributed to chemical or 
meteorological processes, or both. Correlations of the Antarctic total ozone amount 
during the relevant time of year with stratospheric temperature have been reported by five 
sets of authors in the special issue of Geophysical Research Letters (November 
Supplement,1986). Temperature correlation with ozone does not resolve this issue, since 
it could be cause or effect. As yet unpublished work from a collaborative study between 
the UK Meteorological Office, the ECMWF, and the NOAA Aeronomy Lab reveals clear 
correlations of the area bounded by TOMS total ozone contours in October and the area 
bounded by the Antarctic sea ice limit in late winter, from 1979-86. In addition, the 
Halley Bay total ozone amount during October is highly anticorrelated with Southern 
Hemisphere sea surface temperatures, averaged for July-August- September, over the 
period 1957-1985, with r = -0.74 (significant at better than 1% level). The angular 
momentum from 1000 to 100 mb, in the latitude belt 51.5 degrees S to 65.9 degrees S has 
shown a marked increase during the period 1976-1985, a result consistent with an 
equatorward shift in the contours of zonal mean wind in September, as analyzed by 
NASA Ames meteorologists from radiosonde data.

Although correlations have been established between tropospheric variables and total 
ozone during late Antarctic winter, no causal mechanism is immediately evident. The 
question then arises as to whether there is a corresponding signal of change in any 
stratospheric dynamical variables. The objectively analyzed cross-section of wind and 
temperature produced at NASA Ames from radiosonde data show that, for example, the 
20 ms-1 September zonal mean wind contours enclose a monotonically increasing area; 
at 50 mb the increase from 1976 to 1980 amounts to a factor of two. Examination of 
stratospheric potential vorticity fields, calculated with a geostrophic wind assumption 
from satellite soundings of temperature and pressure, does not show evidence of 
systematic change in the lower Antarctic stratosphere during late winter. In the upper 
stratosphere, however, there is evidence of variation in the areas bounded by potential 
vorticity contours defining the edge of the vortex during much of the winter and spring. 
During Septembers 1979-86, the area sharply increased by ~20% from 1979 to 1980, and 
then decreased steadily until by September 1986 it was about 5% below the 1979 value. 
On the other hand, the October monthly means show an increase in area of about 50% 
from 1979 to 1985, with a partial recovery in 1986. This could be interpreted as a 
tendency to a later final warming in October, or as an expanded vortex, or some 
combination of the two. In either case, the effect would be to produce a downward trend 
in the total ozone column via the 15-20% of the total column which is above about 30 
km. It cannot, however, account for changes Of 40-50% in the total column; most of such 
large changes can only arise from losses where most of the column is, in the lower 
stratosphere. Finally, it has been observed that polar stratospheric clouds occur in the 
same region as the Antarctic ozone depletion, and at about the same time; they have also 
been observed over small regions and less persistently, during the Arctic winter. 
Summarizing the chemical and meteorological data, there is evidence both for an unusual 
chemical composition in the lower Antarctic stratosphere of late winter, and for changes 
in the Southern Hemisphere circulation which are correlated with the ozone change.

                                                 Theories

There are very broadly two categories of hypothesis which have been advanced to 
explain the late winter loss of Antarctic ozone. One is that it is essentially chemical in 
origin, the other that it is caused by a change in the circulation leading to enhanced 
ingress of ozone-poor air from the troposphere. The chemical theories require some 
means of maintaining a large positive departure of the mixing ratio of chlorine monoxide 
from that expected due to standard gas phase stratospheric photochemistry; most 
hypotheses have appealed to an intervention by heterogeneous phase chemistry occurring 
on polar stratospheric clouds. One suggestion along these lines is that active chlorine is 
released from HCl and especially ClON02 by reactions on p.s.c., polar stratospheric 
clouds, surfaces; another is that nitric acid vapor is condensed into p.s.c.'s, having the 
effect of removing NOx from the gas phase and so allowing high ClO amounts because 
of the resulting inhibition of ClON02 formation. The loss of HN03 from the gas phase 
could permit high HOx amounts, which in turn can liberate ClO from HCl. There are four 
chain reactions by which chlorine can destroy ozone:

1.	C10 + O ---> Cl + O2
2.	Cl + 03 ----> C10+ O2
 
net: O + 03 --- > O2 + O2 
----------------------------------

3.	C10 + BrO ---> Cl + Br +O2
4.	Cl + 03---> C10 + O2
5.	Br + 03 ~> BrO +O2
----------------------------------

net: O3 + O3 ---> O2 + O2 + O2

Note that there is another channel in reaction (3) 
C1O + BrO ---> Br + OC10 (3b) 
which does not cause catalytic O3 loss, and which produces the OC1O molecule.

6.	C1O + C10 + M ---> (C1O)2 + M
7.	(C1O)2 + hv ---> Cl + C1OO
8.	C1OO + M ---> Cl + O2 + M
 
2. Cl + 03 ---> C10 + O2 
2. Cl + 03 ---> C10 + O2 
--------------------------------- 
net: O3 + O3 ---> O2 + O2 + O2 

9.	C10 + H02 ---> HOCl + O2
 
11. HOCl + hv ---> OH + Cl
10.	OH + O3 ---> H02 + O2
 
2. Cl + 03 ---> C10 + O2 
--------------------------------  
net: O3 + O3 ---> O2 + O2 

One common feature to all four chain reactions is that C1O is the product of the reaction 
destroying O3, so measurement of it must be a high priority. Measurement of BrO and 
OC1O would decide the extent of occurrence of the 2nd mechanism, (3a-4-5). None of 
the above mechanisms can be made to work with purely homogeneous gas phase 
chemistry, because the reaction 
C1O + N02 + M ---> ClONO2 + M (12) 
locks up the chlorine in the reservoir species ClONO2, which it is thus obviously useful 
to measure. Another chlorine reservoir is HCl, so this too should be measured. HCl may 
be in either the gas phase or condensed on particle surfaces.

It is not certain how reactive nitrogen is partitioned between NO, NO2, N2O5, HNO3 
and the aqueous phase (in p.s.c's), so measurements of these species and/or their sum 
total in the gas phase is also important. The nitric acid content of p.s.c. particles would 
provide a crucial constraint.

There are a number of other chemical theories, such as one suggesting a solar cycle 
induced enhancement of NOy that would affect ozone. Although these currently seem 
unlikely, evidence concerning them will be sought.

Measurements of species which have a source at the surface and a sink in the middle and 
upper stratosphere (for example N2O, CF2C12, CFC13) should provide valuable data on 
how long the air sampled has been in the stratosphere, and whether it has descended 
during the period of winter circulation (March - October) from higher levels, or whether 
it has ascended from the troposphere below. Such measurements, if taken horizontally (or 
isentropically) across the vortex, could also test another possible mechanism, not so far 
aired in the literature, that increased frequency in recent years of isentropic transport of 
air from the lower midlatitude stratosphere to high latitudes would appear as an ozone 
reduction there; below about 60 mb, the isentropic ozone gradient from 35 S to 90 S 
appears to be equatorward in late winter.

                                                       Operational Plan

Scientific Observations Required to Understand the Antarctic Ozone Hole 
There is no doubt that we are data limited. While the data base for the total column 
content of ozone is excellent, we have a very limited data base for temperature and the 
vertical distribution of ozone, and a data base limited to total column abundances for 
some of the many chemical species involved.

To help improve our understanding of the processes which are causing Antarctic ozone to 
decrease, NASA is planning a two-aircraft experiment in order to obtain a data set that 
can be used to address the probable causes for the phenomenon. The aircraft experiment 
has been designed to test many of the key aspects of the present theories, but has also 
been designed to provide a rather complete data base of valuable information even if all 
the current ideas are incorrect.

The NASA ER-2 aircraft and the DC-8 are ideally suited to study this important problem. 
The ER-2 is the high altitude research aircraft and will be able to penetrate the ozone hole 
at the altitudes of the maximum decline in ozone. It will carry a suite of in situ 
experiments that will provide data on the air mass within the confines of the hole itself.
The DC-8 will be equipped with remote sensors that will map the vertical distributions of 
ozone and aerosols above the cruising altitude of the aircraft and within the hole. There 
will also be measurements of the column abundance of NO2, OClO, BrO, ClONO2, HCl, 
NHO3 and other species. In addition, the DC-8 will carry a number of in situ experiments 
because this aircraft will attain altitudes associated with the lower extremes of the ozone 
hole.

